Add changelog entries for 11.0.0_beta (#5852)
citusdata/citus: CHANGELOG.md

* Add support for `ALTER FUNCTION ... SUPPORT ...` commands

* Adds support for `CREATE SCHEMA AUTHORIZATION` statements without schema name

* Adds support for `TRUNCATE` for foreign tables

* Adds support for adding partitioned local tables to Citus metadata

* Adds support for automatic binary encoding in re-partition joins when possible

* Adds support for foreign tables in MX

* Adds support for operator class parameters in indexes

* Allows `create_distributed_function()` on a function owned by an extension

* Allows creating distributed tables in sequential mode

* Allows disabling nodes when multiple failures happen

* Delegates function calls of the form `SELECT .. FROM func()`

* Deprecates `master_get_table_metadata` UDF

* Deprecates inactive shard state, never marks any placement inactive

* Disables auto-undistributing for local tables added by the user

* Disables distributed & reference foreign tables

* Disallows remote execution from queries on shards

* Drops `citus.enable_cte_inlining` GUC

* Drops `citus.single_shard_commit_protocol` GUC, defaults to 2PC

* Drops support for `citus.multi_shard_commit_protocol`, always use 2PC

> * Enables re-partition joins in transaction blocks

Reviewer: can we move these 3 to the `adds support` section above?

* Turns metadata syncing on by default

* Adds `citus_finalize_upgrade_to_citus11()` which is necessary to upgrade to
  Citus 11+ from earlier versions

* Adds `citus.max_client_connections` GUC to limit non-Citus connections

* Allows locally creating objects having a dependency that cannot be distributed

* Distributes aggregates with `CREATE AGGREGATE` command

* Distributes functions with `CREATE FUNCTION` command

* `citus_shard_indexes_on_worker` shows all local shard indexes regardless of
  `search_path`

* `citus_shards_on_worker` shows all local shards regardless of `search_path`

* Adds `citus.create_object_propagation` GUC to control DDL creation behaviour
  in transactions

* Hides shards based on `application_name` prefix

* Prevents specifying `application_name` via `citus.node_conninfo`

* Starts identifying rebalancer backends by `application_name=citus_rebalancer`

* Starts identifying internal backends by `application_name=citus_internal`

* Adds `citus.enable_unsafe_triggers` flag to enable unsafe triggers on
  distributed tables

* Adds `fix_partition_shard_index_names` UDF to fix currently broken names

* Adds propagation for foreign server commands

> * Adds propagation of `CREATE AGGREGATE` commands

Reviewer 2: We already have that above as "Distributes aggregates with `CREATE AGGREGATE` command"

### citus v11.0.0_beta (March 22, 2022) ###

* Drops support for PostgreSQL 12

* Turns metadata syncing on by default

* Adds `citus_finalize_upgrade_to_citus11()` which is necessary to upgrade to
  Citus 11+ from earlier versions

* Adds `citus.max_client_connections` GUC to limit non-Citus connections

* Allows locally creating objects having a dependency that cannot be distributed

* Distributes aggregates with `CREATE AGGREGATE` command

* Distributes functions with `CREATE FUNCTION` command

* Adds `citus.create_object_propagation` GUC to control DDL creation behaviour
  in transactions

* Hides shards based on `application_name` prefix

* Prevents specifying `application_name` via `citus.node_conninfo`

* Starts identifying rebalancer backends by `application_name=citus_rebalancer`

* Starts identifying internal backends by `application_name=citus_internal`

* Adds `citus.enable_unsafe_triggers` flag to enable unsafe triggers on
  distributed tables

* Adds `fix_partition_shard_index_names` UDF to fix currently broken names

* Adds propagation for foreign server commands

> * Adds missing version-mismatch checks for columnar tables

Reviewer: I'd move these two bottom

* Adds support for adding partitioned local tables to Citus metadata

* Adds support for automatic binary encoding in re-partition joins when possible

* Adds support for foreign tables in MX

* Adds support for operator class parameters in indexes

* Adds support for re-partition joins in transaction blocks

* Adds support for re-partition joins on followers

* Adds support for shard replication > 1 hash distributed tables on Citus MX

* Allows `create_distributed_function()` on a function owned by an extension

* Allows creating distributed tables in sequential mode

* Allows disabling nodes when multiple failures happen

* Delegates function calls of the form `SELECT .. FROM func()`

* `citus_shard_indexes_on_worker` shows all local shard indexes regardless of
  `search_path`

* `citus_shards_on_worker` shows all local shards regardless of `search_path`

* Deprecates inactive shard state, never marks any placement inactive

* Disables distributed & reference foreign tables

* Prevents propagating objects having a circular dependency

* Prevents propagating objects having a dependency to an object with unsupported
  type

* Deprecates `master_get_table_metadata` UDF

> * Allows users to add local tables to metadata using

Reviewer: maybe move this line to 'supported' section

* Fixes a bug that could cause `worker_save_query_explain_analyze` to fail on
  custom types

* Fixes a bug that could cause failed re-partition joins to leak result tables

* Fixes a bug that could cause prerequisite columnar table access method
  objects being not created during pg upgrades

* Fixes a bug that could cause re-partition joins involving local shards to fail

* Fixes a bug that limits usage of sequences in non-int columns

* Fixes a bug that prevents `DROP SCHEMA CASCADE`

* Fixes a build error that happens when `lz4` is not installed

* Fixes a clog lookup failure that could occur when writing to a columnar table

* Fixes a crash that occurs when the aggregate that cannot be pushed-down
  returns empty result from a worker

* Fixes a missing `FROM` clause entry error

* Fixes a possible segfault that could happen when reporting distributed
  deadlock

* Fixes an issue that could cause unexpected errors when there is an in-progress
  write to a columnar table

* Fixes an unexpected error that occurs due to aborted writes to a columnar
  table with an index

* Fixes an unexpected error that occurs when writing to a columnar table created
  in older version

> * Improves handling of `IN`, `OUT` and `INOUT` parameters for functions

Reviewer: Minor: maybe move this to the bottom of `supported` entries.

Initially the wording of this also was 'fixes`, but given that it was never supported due the the bug, I see this as a new feature.

* Fixes issue when compiling Citus from source with some compilers

* Fixes issues on `ATTACH PARTITION` logic

* Fixes naming issues of newly created partitioned indexes

> * Adds propagation of `TEXT SEARCH CONFIGURATION` objects

Reviewer: maybe move these to to the `newly supported` section above?

### citus v11.0.0_beta (March 22, 2022) ###

> * Turns MX on by default

Reviewer: These two should stay on top.

I'm still thinking if we can have a nicer line for the first one

Reviewer: Marco used terms like `That means you can always query distributed tables from any node in a Citus cluster!  `  or `Automatic metadata syncing ` in the draft blog post.

Maybe we can ask @marcocitus's opinion on this first line.

Reviewer 3: maybe: MX -> metadata syncing

* Adds `citus_finalize_upgrade_to_citus11()` which is necessary to upgrade to
  Citus 11+ from earlier versions

> * Distributes functions with `CREATE FUNCTION` command

Reviewer: I think `Adds propagation of `CREATE AGGREGATE` commands` could come right after this one. Maybe with the same wording?

Author: to conform lexicographical ordering, I placed aggregates before functions here.

> * `citus_shard_indexes_on_worker` shows all local shard indexes regardless of

Reviewer: The two lines are less interesting, so could go somewhere bottom in the newly added feature section.

  `search_path`

* `citus_shards_on_worker` shows all local shards regardless of `search_path`

> * Adds `citus.create_object_propagation` GUC to control ddl creation behaviour

Reviewer 4: nit
```suggestion
* Adds `citus.create_object_propagation` GUC to control DDL creation behaviour
```

  in transactions

> * Sets `create_object_propagation` default to `immediate`

Reviewer 4: I think we should drop this one

> * Uses a fixed `application_name` while connecting to remote nodes

Reviewer 3: I guess we later changed to use a dynamic application_name that includes the GPID

Maybe: `The application_name used for internal connections is prefixed with citus_internal`

* Hides shards based on `application_name` prefix

> * Prevents `citus.node_conninfo` to use `application_name`

Reviewer 4: maybe ?

```suggestion
* Prevents specifying `application_name` via `citus.node_conninfo`
```

* Starts identifying rebalancer backends by `application_name=citus_rebalancer`

> * Starts internal backends by `application_name=citus_internal`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Starts identifying internal backends by `application_name=citus_internal`
```

> * Starts internal backends by `application_name=citus_internal`

Reviewer 3: I suggested removing the "fixed" one, since it's not atually fixed.

> * Adds `citus.enable_unsafe_triggers` flag to propagate triggers on distributed

Author: I applied a similar change that is multiline

> * Adds `citus.enable_unsafe_triggers` flag to propagate triggers on distributed

Author: ```md
* Adds `citus.enable_unsafe_triggers` flag to enable unsafe triggers on
  distributed tables
```

  tables

> * Adds `citus.max_client_connections` GUC to limit non-Citus connections

Reviewer: an important addition, lets move above in the "newly added" features part.

> * Adds `fix_partition_shard_index_names` udf to fix currently broken names

Reviewer 4: nit

```suggestion
* Adds `fix_partition_shard_index_names` UDF to fix currently broken names
```

* Adds propagation for foreign server commands

* Adds propagation of `CREATE AGGREGATE` commands

* Add support for `ALTER FUNCTION ... SUPPORT ...` commands

* Adds support for `CREATE SCHEMA AUTHORIZATION` statements without schema name

* Adds support for `TRUNCATE` for foreign tables

> * Adds support for adding partitioned local table to Citus metadata

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Adds support for adding partitioned local tables to Citus metadata
```

* Adds support for automatic binary encoding in re-partition joins when possible

* Adds support for foreign tables in MX

* Adds support for operator class parameters in indexes

* Allows `create_distributed_function()` on a function owned by an extension

* Allows creating distributed tables in sequential mode

* Allows disabling nodes when multiple failures happen

> * Creates type locally if it has undistributable dependency

Reviewer 4: Now we allow doing so for many objects as in https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5836.

I forgot adding a DESCRIPTION line for that pr, so this is my bad. Maybe we can replace this by such a generic one:

Allows locally creating objects having a dependency that we cannot distribute

Reviewer: > we cannot distribute

cannot be distributed?

Author: I used the following as the 4th item in the changelog:

    * Allows locally creating objects having a dependency that cannot be distributed

> * Creates type locally if it has undistributable dependency

Reviewer 4: also, https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5852#discussion_r832969803

* Delegates function calls of the form `SELECT .. FROM func()`

* Deprecates `master_get_table_metadata` UDF

> * Deprecates Inactive shard state, never marks any placement inactive

Reviewer: an important addition, lets move above in the "dropped" features part.

Reviewer 4: also, https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5852#discussion_r832970086

> * Disables auto-undistributing for local tables added by the user

Author: I used your suggestion. However I am open to other ideas if @agedemenli has any

> * Disables distributed & reference foreign tables

Reviewer: an important addition, lets move above in the "dropped" features part.

> * Disallows remote execution from queries on shards

Reviewer 3: No, this also applies to function calls in queries on shards. We should keep this line.

> * Drops `citus_worker_stat_activity`

Reviewer 4: maybe drop this entry (see the comment that left for `Introduces `citus_stat_activity` view`)

* Drops `citus.enable_cte_inlining` GUC

* Drops `citus.single_shard_commit_protocol` GUC, defaults to 2PC

* Drops support for `citus.multi_shard_commit_protocol`, always use 2PC

* Enables re-partition joins in transaction blocks

* Enables re-partition joins on followers

* Enables shard replication > 1 hash distributed tables on Citus MX

> * Errors out if object has circular dependency

Reviewer: an important addition, lets move above in the "dropped" features part  (2 lines)

Reviewer 4: also, https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5852#discussion_r832981776

> * Errors out if object has circular dependency

Reviewer 4: since we still allow creating them locally ?

```suggestion
* Prevents propagating objects having a circular dependency
```

> * Errors out if object has dependency to an object with unsupported type

Reviewer 4: since we still allow creating them locally ?

```suggestion
* Prevents propagating objects having a dependency to an object with unsupported type
```

> * Fixes `ALTER STATISTICS IF EXISTS` bug

Reviewer 4: some more details ? (cc: @agedemenli)

Reviewer: maybe: Fixes unnecessary errors for  `ALTER STATISTICS IF EXISTS` when the statistics does not exist

see https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5435

> * Fixes a bug preventing issues while create dependencies from multiple sessions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that causes issues while create dependencies from multiple sessions
```

> * Fixes a bug that causes reading columnar metapage as all-zeros under high
>   write concurrency

Reviewer 4: as in 10.2.2

```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that causes reading columnar metapage as all-zeros when
  writing to a columnar table
```

* Fixes a bug that could break `DROP SCHEMA/EXTENSON` commands when there is a
  columnar table

* Fixes a bug that could break pg upgrades due to missing `pg_depend` records
  for columnar table access method

* Fixes a bug that could cause `CREATE INDEX` to fail for expressions when using
  custom `search_path`

* Fixes a bug that could cause `worker_save_query_explain_analyze` to fail on
  custom types

* Fixes a bug that could cause failed re-partition joins to leak result tables

> * Fixes a bug that could cause prerequisite `columnarAM` objects being not
>   created during pg upgrade

Reviewer 4: as in 10.2.2:

```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could cause prerequisite columnar table access method
  objects being not created during pg upgrades
```

* Fixes a bug that could cause re-partition joins involving local shards to fail

* Fixes a bug that limits usage of sequences in non-int columns

* Fixes a bug that prevents `DROP SCHEMA CASCADE`

* Fixes a clog lookup failure that could occur when writing to a columnar table

* Fixes a crash that occurs when the aggregate that cannot be pushed-down
  returns empty result from a worker

* Fixes a missing `FROM` clause entry error

* Fixes a possible segfault that could happen when reporting distributed
  deadlock

* Fixes an issue that could cause unexpected errors when there is an in-progress
  write to a columnar table

* Fixes an unexpected error that occurs due to aborted writes to a columnar
  table with an index

* Fixes an unexpected error that occurs when writing to a columnar table created
  in older version

> * Fixes function signature generation bug

Reviewer 4: some more details ? (cc: @agedemenli, iirc)

Reviewer: Maybe: Improves handling of IN, OUT and INOUT parameters for functions

Author: I am going with Onder's suggested change here.

* Fixes issue when compiling Citus from source with some compilers

* Fixes issues on `ATTACH PARTITION` logic

* Fixes naming issues of newly created partitioned indexes

> * Implements `TEXT SEARCH CONFIGURATION` propagation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Adds propagation of `TEXT SEARCH CONFIGURATION` objects
```

> * Implements `TEXT SEARCH DICTIONARY` propagation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Adds propagation of `TEXT SEARCH DICTIONARY` objects
```

> * Improves concurrent metadata syncing and metadata changing DDL operations

Reviewer 4: improves, but how ?

Reviewer: by acquiring proper locks, but not sure if that is relevant to the users?

Author: let me just remove this line here, then

* Improves self-deadlock prevention for `CREATE INDEX / REINDEX CONCURRENTLY`
  commands for builds using PG14 or higher

> * Introduces `citus_backend_gpid()`

Reviewer 4: some more details ? (cc: @halilozanakgul)
```suggestion
* Introduces `citus_backend_gpid()` <to do foo bar>
```

Reviewer 5: how about
```suggestion
* Introduces `citus_backend_gpid()` UDF to get global pid of the current backend
```

* Introduces `citus_check_cluster_node_health` UDF to check cluster connectivity

* Introduces `citus_check_connection_to_node` UDF to check node connectivity

> * Introduces `citus_coordinator_nodeid` UDF

Reviewer 4: some more details ?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Introduces `citus_coordinator_nodeid` UDF to find the node id of the coordinator node
```

> * Introduces `citus_stat_activity` view

Author: I am more inclined to start with the positive message here.

How about the following (split into multiple lines)

    Introduces `citus_stat_activity` view and drops `citus_worker_stat_activity` UDF

> * Introduces `citus_stat_activity` view

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure if we can say `instead` here. I don't think they are completely interchangeable.
Also they both have a UDF and a view. If we have to call them something I think `view` is better since that's the part users use.

> * Introduces `use_citus_managed_tables` GUC

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Introduces `citus.use_citus_managed_tables` GUC to add local tables to Citus metadata automatically
```

> * Introduces `use_citus_managed_tables` GUC

Reviewer: maybe citus.use_citus_managed_tables

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5852#discussion_r832988638

* Introduces a new flag `force_delegation` in `create_distributed_function()`,
  which will allow a function to be delegated in an explicit transaction block.
  Such delegated functions are restricted to use only the distributed argument

>   value.

Reviewer 4: hmm, should we drop that part ?

Reviewer: probably yes

* Introduces global pid

> * Introduces helper functions for global pid

Reviewer 4: should we drop those two ?

Reviewer: probably yes

Author: @halilozanakgul what do you think?

Author: Currently we have the following

* Introduces `citus_backend_gpid()` UDF to get global pid of the current backend
* Overrides `pg_cancel_backend()` and `pg_terminate_backend()` to run with
  global pid

If you have some specific helper function names, maybe we can introduce new entries such as:

* Introduces `new_helper_function_using_gpid()` UDF that does awesome stuff

Can you come up with such entries @halilozanakgul ?

* Moves `pg_dist_object` to `pg_catalog` schema

* Overrides `pg_cancel_backend()` and `pg_terminate_backend()` to run with
  global pid

* Partitions shards to be co-located with the parent shards

* Prevents Citus table functions from being called on shards

* Prevents creating distributed functions when there are out of sync nodes

> * Prevents failing over to local execution for DDLs that cannot be executed

Reviewer: this seems not an interesting user facing feature, maybe drop?

Reviewer 4: Umm, but this indeed fixes a bug, should we really drop ?

Reviewer: In the end, the command still fails, right? It was mostly giving much nicer error?

  locally

> * Propagates `CREATE SCHEMA .. GRANT ON SCHEMA ..` commands

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Adds propagating of `CREATE SCHEMA .. GRANT ON SCHEMA ..` commands
```

> * Propagates `pg_dist_object` to worker nodes

Reviewer 4: should we drop that since it looks like an internal detail of MX improvements ? (cc: @velioglu)

Reviewer: Still, seems like a user facing change as it changes quite a bit of the user experience. I'd prefer to keep unless you have strong opinions

Author: I am keeping it

> * Propagates schema operations

Reviewer 4: to be more consistent, maybe:
```suggestion
* Adds propagation of `SCHEMA` operations
```

> * Propagates tables and sequences like other objects to remote nodes

Reviewer 4: internal detail of MX improvements ?

Reviewer: Yes, we can remove

> * Propagates tables and sequences like other objects to remote nodes

Reviewer 4: agree, https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5852#discussion_r832991727

* Provides notice message for idempotent `create_distributed_function` calls

> * Pushes down procedures with OUT arguments to the worker nodes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Adds support for pushing procedures with `OUT` arguments down to the worker nodes
```

> * Refactor `GenerateGrantOnSchemaStmtForRights` to a more generic form

Reviewer: this seems not an interesting user facing feature, maybe drop?

Reviewer 4: same, https://github.com/citusdata/citus/pull/5852#discussion_r832992542

> * Refactor `GenerateGrantOnSchemaStmtForRights` to a more generic form

Reviewer: yes, lets remove

> * Reinstates optimisation for uniform shard interval ranges

Reviewer: this seems not an interesting user facing feature, maybe drop?

Reviewer 4: we had this entry for older releases, so might be nice to keep for consistency ?

Reviewer: Ah, that's tricky. Then, lets keep

* Relaxes table ownership check to privileges check while acquiring lock

> * Removes `citus.shard_placement_policy`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Drops support for `citus.shard_placement_policy` GUC
```

> * Removes `master_append_table_to_shard`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Drops `master_append_table_to_shard` UDF
```

* Removes `master_apply_delete_command`

* Removes copy into new shard logic for append-distributed tables

> * Removes superuser requirement for metadata sync

Reviewer: this seems not an interesting user facing feature, maybe drop?

Reviewer 4: Isn't that a user-facing change in the sense that now we allow users doing something that we weren't before ?

Reviewer 4: oh, it isn't

> * Removes support for distributed `cstore_fdw` tables in favour of Citus
>   columnar

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Drops support for distributed `cstore_fdw` tables in favor of Citus
  columnar table access method
```

* Removes support for dropping distributed and local indexes in the same
  statement

> * Replaces `citus.enable_object_propagation` with `citus.enable_metadata_sync`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Replaces `citus.enable_object_propagation` GUC with `citus.enable_metadata_sync`
```

* Requires superuser for `citus_add_node()` and `citus_activate_node()`

* Revokes read access to `columnar.chunk` from unprivileged user

> * Starts erroring out for unsupported lateral subqueries

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Disallows unsupported lateral subqueries on distributed tables
```
